[AUDIO LOGO]
>> Crystal grids, a
great buzzword nowadays.
We see elaborate, spectacular
layouts of colorful crystals
pop on almost every
conscious social media page.
Grids are becoming
increasingly trendy
and are often an unmissable tool
during a new moon manifestation
ritual.
Not only do grids
look beautiful,
but they serve a great
amplification purpose
in any intentional practice.
You can create one
intuitively or be
highly mathematical
about it in order
to achieve a particular effect.
In this episode, you'll
learn all about crystal grids
and how they can be
phenomenal collaborators when
it comes to conscious
and intentional living.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> A crystal grid is when
you take various crystals,
and you'll lay them out
according to a particular
sacred geometry pattern.
Typically, they are going
to be two-dimensional
in their patterns.
So for example, you might
pick the four directions,
or you might do a circle.
And you would lay those crystals
in that pattern, that geometry.
And the crystals will draw
the Earth's energy up.
So they'll draw it up.
And then they'll create a
container within the room
or within the space
that is gridded by them.
And they hold that energy.
So as long as that
crystal remains in place
where it was put, according
to its instruction
and its intention and the
geometry that was laid down,
it will hold it in that space
so long as that crystal remains
undisturbed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> A simple way to create a
grid is to have a board or cloth
with sacred geometry
designs on it,
such as the Flower of
Life or the Seed of Life,
as you can place the crystals
you are working with onto
the points of the design
and create a beautiful grid.
Creating a grid is
kind of like cooking.
If you're familiar with
the metaphysical properties
of the crystals you are using,
place them with intention.
For example, you may
place rose quartz
for bringing in more
self-love, self-acceptance,
and self forgiveness.
And you may place
black tourmaline
and other dark grounding
stones around it
so that that
intention is grounded
into the physical reality.
>> Each tradition that works
with crystals has different
perspectives and methods on how
to best build crystal grids,
which includes the different
types and colors of crystals
to use for them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When we make a crystal grid,
we really want to use clear
quartz crystals, and typically
single-terminated clear quartz
crystals where the crystals can
be pointing from the Earth up
so they can draw
that Earth energy up.
And the reason that we want
to just use clear quartz
is we just want to bring
through that pure source
energy, that pure light.
We just want to anchor
the light into the space.
And the more we can bring
through that pure light
straight from source, which
the quartz crystals are
fantastic at doing, the
clear quartz in particular,
that is going to be the optimal
way to anchor a crystal grid.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In our tradition we very
rarely use crystal grids,
except in very specific
ceremonies after which the grid
is dismantled.
One needs to be very careful
when it comes to crystal grids.
They have a huge effect on
the electromagnetic field.
And they can be damaging if you
don't know what you're doing.
A safe and commonly
widespread rock
grid that is used by Native
Americans and other Indigenous
nations worldwide
are medicine wheels.
Stonehenge in England
is a well-known example
of a stone grid.
All rocks contain some
crystalline elements.
Granite for example,
has a minimum
of three crystalline components.
The medicine wheel that
I use comes from Sunbear,
which was a mentor to me.
He was a very important
man in my life.
We start with a
center stone which
represents the great spirit.
And then we put seven rocks
around the great spirit
and that is for the sun and
for the moon and for the stars
and for the Earth People that
we identify with the turtle,
for the wind people that we
identify with the butterfly,
for the water people that
we identify with the frog,
and for the fire people that we
identify with the Thunderbird.
And then we place
the four directions,
which are very important,
starting with the east,
a stone to the south, a stone to
the west, a stone to the north.
And then we do these animals.
There's 12 animals.
Within each direction,
there are three animals,
three spokes, three stones.
And so that makes for 12.
And then they're going
towards center stone
from each direction stone
you have three stones.
And these stones are the
attributes of that direction.
And then when all of them
have been put into place,
well, we awaken
that medicine wheel.
And then the energy
comes from all around.
It's like a microcosm.
It's like the universe
in a smaller space.
And that's where
you go for healing.
That's where you go for
meditation and the ceremony
and rituals.
>> There's different ways
to make crystal grids.
But the methods that I have
learned through the Mystery
School tradition is that we will
hold the crystals in our hands
that we want to be
anchoring within the space.
And we have particular chants.
These chants are drawn
from ancient language.
And then based on that
purpose of that grid,
we'll have a particular chant
to instruct the crystals which
sacred form are they anchoring.
We walk the particular
geometry out.
We say the particular chant
and those sacred words.
And then we anchor the
crystal in each spot
that will help then anchor
that particular grid.
So the whole time you're
holding this energy
as you are charging
up and instructing
those crystals on what to do.
And then you anchor them.
And you leave them there.
You don't remove them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When these crystal grids
are in place within a space,
it really expands the
energy of the space.
It expands what you can do
within that space as well.
So for example, when I have
anchored sacred geometry
and have anchored the
crystal grids into my space,
I can do so much more.
I can work for longer
periods of time.
It gives me a lot more
energy to be able to access.
It's almost like you're
anchoring this container.
And you've built the energy
up in that container.
So rather than the water
just running through and then
running right out
the drain, it's
being held within that space.
So it's an amplified field.
And then everything that we
can do within this space,
it will amplify the magic that
we're creating inside of it.
And it will help amplify
and draw the divine energy
into support you in
your creative efforts.
So it will definitely amplify
any process of manifestation
within that space.
So it's amazing to
have it in your home,
in your healing
space, in your office,
wherever you want
that extra support.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I often make grids.
Crystal grids are
all over my house.
But usually, I would
make a crystal grid
for a certain purpose.
So today, I am doing a grid for
the healing of Mother Earth.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the center is a
chrysocolla sphere
representing our Mother Earth.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And the rainbow rays
around it, the white ray
is the cosmic ray
coming from the cosmos,
from the great
central sun, bringing
in this white light of healing.
And the black ray
is for taking in all
the heavy, dense
energies from Earth
and digesting it because
that's what Mother Earth does.
She digests all the heavy energy
that we release into Earth.
The amethyst's
purple violet rays
for bringing in more
wisdom, inspiration,
higher knowledge,
connection to the soul
and to our higher selves.
The red ray is for bringing in
vitality but in a balanced way,
bringing creativity
for Mother Earth,
for everybody to express their
creativity as best as they can.
The yellow ray is for
the will and for bringing
in manifestation for everybody
so that they can really
fully manifest their
highest intentions coming
from the violet ray.
The blue ray is for the Earth
as well as for everybody
to express their
truth, to really
be able to speak their
truth, and communicate
what they really mean.
The green ray is for
all the emotions,
the turbulent emotions
going on around the world
that it may be healed, with
the healing green energy
of the trees, of nature.
And the pink ray is for bringing
in more love to the Earth, more
compassion, forgiveness,
and just unconditional love
for everybody, that everybody
can just be from their heart
and express their love
and unconditional love.
>> An important part of working
with crystals and creating
grids with them is knowing
how to take care of them.
Let's learn how we can best
clean, clear, and charge
crystals.
>> The very first thing that
must be done when you receive
a crystal is to purify it.
Crystals contain information.
It has recorded all the
energies, peoples, events,
circumstances, and
places where it
has been in contact with
since the moment it was born.
If you are using a crystal for
healing, this is not useful.
You need to know exactly
what's in the crystal
to be able to use it
for healing purposes.
There is only one
way of doing this.
You take a bowl of water.
It has to be a glass or a
ceramic or a wooden bowl.
You don't want plastic.
You don't want metal.
You have to put pure water or
distilled water or spring water
into that.
And then you add a pinch
of natural gray sea salt.
If you look at
gray sea salt, you
will notice that it's
all cubes because they
are crystals, soft crystals.
And when they dissolve in
the water, what this does
is create an electrical
charge in the water
molecule that is stronger
than the charge in the crystal
matrix.
This is what will erase
the memory of the crystal.
The first time requires
seven days and seven nights.
This will erase all the
memory of the crystal.
If a crystal is sitting
in one place, for example,
in your home, then
you can purify it
once every month
or every season.
They don't take
on energy as much
as when you use it
directly with a person.
Now, you can use essential
oils to purify the energy
field around a crystal.
But it won't purify what's
in the crystal, what
the memory of the crystal is.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When you receive
or purchase a crystal,
it's a good idea to
cleanse the crystal first.
There are many ways to cleanse a
crystal, and the most important
is your intention
of purification.
One method is the
Marcel Vogel technique
of cleansing the crystal
with your breath,
with a vigorous
exhale, just like that,
making sure you have the
intention, and exhaling.
Another way of
cleansing crystal is
with burning sage or
sweetgrass or Palo Santo
under the crystal,
moving it back and forth.
You can also wash your crystals
in water, in the river,
in the sea, or in any
moving body of water.
But just make sure you
check because some crystals
don't like water.
And they may dissolve.
Placing the crystal
in the morning
sun for not more than two
hours is also a wonderful way,
or using sound.
You can use a musical
instrument, a crystal bowl,
or a crystal tuning fork
or even your own voice.
For deep cleansing
a crystal, it is
nice to bury the crystal
in the Earth for a few days
or however long you feel
it needs to restore itself.
>> It takes a lot to get
stones out of a mine.
They've been touched by
machines and miners, shippers,
stone cutters, store employees.
When you get a new stone,
the first thing to do
is cleanse it.
Generally, the recommendation
is to cleanse our stones
with running water.
The running water
continually hitting the stone
energetically jostles
the typical ionic bonding
holding the molecules
of the stone
together, helping them to
release dirty energy that
may be held inside.
If we are using water
to cleanse our stones,
we also have to know which
stones can't tolerate water.
Soft stones that
are finely polished,
like a selenite massage tool
or a septarian nodule sphere,
will lose their
smooth, shiny surface
if you leave them in
the water too long.
The sheet micas,
like lepidolite,
will swell and possibly
separate if they're in water.
Some people recommend salt
water to cleanse stones.
The cautions here are for
stones with high water content,
like opal, which can
be killed by the salt.
Another method of
cleansing is to use sound.
We can use Tibetan cymbals,
singing bowls, or tuning forks.
The sound waves have a similar
effect as flowing water,
to break up accumulated
energy deposits
in the structure of the stones.
>> Salt water is a
great way to reset gems.
They can absorb a
lot of our energy
and also draw out
a lot of karma.
They can become very heavy.
A quick salt water soak can
reset a gem very quickly.
At the same time,
wearing a gemstone
to uplift human consciousness
is not exactly a small job.
And we find that astrological
gemstones shouldn't
be transferred to another
owner without a great deal
of resetting.
We completely recut
out a gemstone
if somebody sells it back to us.
Even then, some gems
make it obvious to us
that they are retired
from astrological use.
It's subtle, but
it's clear if a gem
is done with these purposes.
>> There's three crystals that
I'm aware of that don't need
clearing.
And these crystals
then become really
good for using them to
help clear other crystals.
So for example, calcite,
selenite, and kyanite
don't really need clearing
because they're just
kind of self clearing.
So if you get a big slab
of selenite, for example,
you can place your crystals
on that slab of selenite.
And it will help clear
them, or a slab of calcite
or a slab of kyanite.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Once you have
purified the crystal,
then you need to
energize the crystal.
Now, energizing the
crystal, you need
to bring it to running water.
You have, in the running water,
an action on the energy field,
the ionic energy field of the
crystal, that will energize it.
And so you just
let the ocean waves
run over it or the lake waves
or the stream or the river.
If you're working
with running water,
you're energizing
it in a neutral way
that only the
crystal is energized,
not with lunar energy,
not with sun energy, just
neutral energy, exactly
what you need when
you're working with healing.
>> Wearing gems in accordance
with a Muhurta or an auspicious
astrological transit
will amplify its effects.
Chanting the Sanskrit mantras
for that planet when first
wearing the gem will also
help to make it stronger.
But most importantly, being
100% clear on the intentions
and the predicted results
will make it work the best.
And lastly, I'm fascinated
with charging gems
on sacred geometrical plates
made out of conductive elements
like gold or copper.
The Sri Yantra symbol
is very powerful.
And gems seem to really
enjoy spending time
on top of this symbol.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Generally, most stones can
be charged by being placed
on a large quartz crystal or
on a cluster of quartz crystal
for a period of 24 hours.
The points of the quartz crystal
come up and give lots of energy
into whatever the stone
is that you put on it.
There are several other
methods of charging
stones and crystals.
Choosing which one
depends somewhat
on the nature of the stone.
For example, moonstone, with
its Yin-nourishing quality,
might best be charged
overnight in the moonlight.
Pearls also benefit
from moonlight.
And sunstone, with
its very Yang nature,
can be charged for several
hours in the sunlight.
Some stones that have
a relationship to blood
will benefit from being charged
with a piece of hematite
or in a bowl containing small
tumbled pieces of hematite.
The iron in the hematite
strengthens the stone's effect
on the blood.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> After purifying and
energizing your crystal,
you want to wrap
them in red cloth.
The red cloth makes a
natural energy barrier
which will protect your
crystal from all outer energy.
When you put the crystal
into the red cloth
and into the specific
bag so you can recognize
which crystal is in
that bag, you also
tell the crystal to go to rest.
When you take it out,
you also say, wake up,
so that the crystal knows
that it starts to work again.
These are conscious beings.
So you have to talk to them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The crystals that you are
going to use for healing,
you really want to treat them
well because these crystals are
going to work.
And they're here
to serve, but there
needs to be a good
relationship that you
have with your
crystals, otherwise
they won't be as strong
for doing the healing
work with you.
So the best way to really
take care of your crystals
is to store them on either
an altar or a sacred space.
If you're going to put
them in a box, that's fine.
But make sure it's natural
material, like wood or even
glass.
>> If we're storing crystals,
ideally we avoid keeping them
in plastic containers.
If possible, store them in
clear glass or wooden containers
or any other container made
from a natural substance.
We have to take care of
our stones with respect.
They're hard, but they're
not indestructible,
especially terminated
crystals can
be chipped at the termination,
damaging their ability
to project energy.
If we're taking
them on the road,
we have to carefully wrap them
so that they'll be cushioned.
Also some stones will fade
if left in the sun too long.
Amethyst is a prime example.
And the Granny Smith
apple green of chrysoprase
also fades in the sun.
>> As our experts
have described,
crystals aren't just phenomenal
for creating powerful grids.
They are also conscious,
living beings.
They must be cared for with the
utmost reverence and respect.
As amplification partners in
any healing or manifestation
practice, it's up to us to
make sure we take care of them
in ways that allow them
to truly take care of us.
Since they are pretty
low-maintenance companions,
the most important ingredient
and truly the universal thread
of it all is to
infuse them with love.
Love them.
Invite them to aid you in
your process of evolution
as well as in the evolution of
your loved ones, your clients,
and of the Earth Herself.
[MUSIC PLAYING]